<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<head
    xmlns:c="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"
    xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml"
  ><title
    >Newton&#x2019;s First Law of Motion: Inertia</title
  ><meta
      name="created-time"
      content="2011/12/28 12:25:43 -0600"
  /><meta
      name="revised-time"
      content="2012/05/02 15:45:28 -0500"
  /><meta
      name="author"
      content="OpenStaxCollege"
  /><meta
      name="licensor"
      content="OSCRiceUniversity"
  /><meta
      name="license"
      content="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/"
  /><meta
      name="keywords"
      content="inertia, mass, Newton&#x2019;s first law of motion"
  /><meta
      name="subject"
      content="Science and Technology"
  /></head
>
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<body
    xmlns:c="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"
    xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml"
    xmlns:qml="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0"
    xmlns:mod="http://cnx.rice.edu/#moduleIds"
    xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/"
    xmlns:data="http://dev.w3.org/html5/spec/#custom"
  ><div
      class="title"
    >Newton&#x2019;s First Law of Motion: Inertia</div
  ><div
      class="abstract"
    ><ul
        class="list"
      > <li
          class="item"
        >Define mass and inertia.</li
      > <li
          class="item"
        >Understand Newton's first law of motion.</li
      > </ul
    ></div
  > <p
      class="para"
      id="import-auto-id2654505"
    >Experience suggests that an object at rest will remain at rest if left alone, and that an object in motion tends to slow down and stop unless some effort is made to keep it moving. What <span
        class="term"
        id="import-auto-id1777407"
      >Newton&#x2019;s first law of motion</span
    ><strong
        class="emphasis"
        data-effect="bold"
    /> states, however, is the following:</p
  > <div
      class="note"
      id="fs-id2690663"
      data-label=""
    ><div
        class="title"
      >Newton&#x2019;s First Law of Motion</div
    > <p
        class="para"
        id="fs-id1694182"
      >A body at rest remains at rest, or, if in motion, remains in motion at a constant velocity unless acted on by a net external force. </p
    ></div
  > <p
      class="para"
      id="import-auto-id1741367"
    >Note the repeated use of the verb &#x201C;remains.&#x201D; We can think of this law as preserving the status quo of motion. </p
  > <p
      class="para"
      id="import-auto-id1904217"
    >Rather than contradicting our experience, <span
        class="term"
      >Newton&#x2019;s first law of motion</span
    > states that there must be a <em
        class="emphasis"
        data-effect="italics"
      >cause</em
    > (which is a net external force) <em
        class="emphasis"
        data-effect="italics"
      >for there to be any change in velocity (either a change in magnitude or direction)</em
    >. We will define <em
        class="emphasis"
        data-effect="italics"
      >net external force</em
    > in the next section. An object sliding across a table or floor slows down due to the net force of friction acting on the object. If friction disappeared, would the object still slow down?</p
  ><p
      class="para"
      id="import-auto-id1416969"
    >The idea of cause and effect is crucial in accurately describing what happens in various situations. For example, consider what happens to an object sliding along a rough horizontal surface. The object quickly grinds to a halt. If we spray the surface with talcum powder to make the surface smoother, the object slides farther. If we make the surface even smoother by rubbing lubricating oil on it, the object slides farther yet. Extrapolating to a frictionless surface, we can imagine the object sliding in a straight line indefinitely. Friction is thus the <em
        class="emphasis"
        data-effect="italics"
      >cause</em
    > <em
        class="emphasis"
        data-effect="italics"
    />of the slowing (consistent with Newton&#x2019;s first law). The object would not slow down at all if friction were completely eliminated. Consider an air hockey table. When the air is turned off, the puck slides only a short distance before friction slows it to a stop. However, when the air is turned on, it creates a nearly frictionless surface, and the puck glides long distances without slowing down. Additionally, if we know enough about the friction, we can accurately predict how quickly the object will slow down. Friction is an external force. </p
  ><p
      class="para"
      id="import-auto-id1486790"
    >Newton&#x2019;s first law is completely general and can be applied to anything from an object sliding on a table to a satellite in orbit to blood pumped from the heart. Experiments have thoroughly verified that any change in velocity (speed or direction) must be caused by an external force. The idea of <em
        class="emphasis"
        data-effect="italics"
      >generally applicable or universal laws</em
    > is important not only here&#x2014;it is a basic feature of all laws of physics. Identifying these laws is like recognizing patterns in nature from which further patterns can be discovered. The genius of Galileo, who first developed the idea for the first law, and Newton, who clarified it, was to ask the fundamental question, &#x201C;What is the cause?&#x201D; Thinking in terms of cause and effect is a worldview fundamentally different from the typical ancient Greek approach when questions such as &#x201C;Why does a tiger have stripes?&#x201D; would have been answered in Aristotelian fashion, &#x201C;That is the nature of the beast.&#x201D; True perhaps, but not a useful insight.</p
  > <section
      id="fs-id1737594"
    ><h1
        class="title"
      >Mass</h1
    > <p
        class="para"
        id="import-auto-id2712510"
      >The property of a body to remain at rest or to remain in motion with constant velocity is called <span
          class="term"
          id="import-auto-id2134480"
        >inertia</span
      >. Newton&#x2019;s first law is often called the <span
          class="term"
          id="import-auto-id1408275"
        >law of inertia</span
      >. As we know from experience, some objects have more inertia than others. It is obviously more difficult to change the motion of a large boulder than that of a basketball, for example. The inertia of an object is measured by its <span
          class="term"
          id="import-auto-id1500464"
        >mass</span
      >. Roughly speaking, mass is a measure of the amount of &#x201C;stuff&#x201D; (or matter) in something. The quantity or amount of matter in an object is determined by the numbers of atoms and molecules of various types it contains. Unlike weight, mass does not vary with location. The mass of an object is the same on Earth, in orbit, or on the surface of the Moon. In practice, it is very difficult to count and identify all of the atoms and molecules in an object, so masses are not often determined in this manner. Operationally, the masses of objects are determined by comparison with the standard kilogram.</p
    ></section
  > <div
      class="exercise"
      id="fs-id2448968"
      data-type="check-understanding"
      data-label=""
    ><div
        class="title"
      >Check Your Understanding</div
    > <div
        class="problem"
        id="fs-id3175448"
      > <p
          class="para"
          id="import-auto-id1678252"
        >Which has more mass: a kilogram of cotton balls or a kilogram of gold?</p
      > </div
    > <div
        class="solution"
        id="fs-id3255910"
        data-label=""
      ><div
          class="title"
        >Answer</div
      > <p
          class="para"
          id="import-auto-id2438567"
        >They are equal. A kilogram of one substance is equal in mass to a kilogram of another substance. The quantities that might differ between them are volume and density.</p
      ></div
    ></div
  ><section
      id="fs-id1651376"
      data-class="section-summary"
    ><h1
        class="title"
      >Section Summary</h1
    ><ul
        class="list"
        data-id="fs-id2410016"
      ><li
          class="item"
        ><span
            class="term"
          >Newton&#x2019;s first law of motion</span
        > states that a body at rest remains at rest, or, if in motion, remains in motion at a constant velocity unless acted on by a net external force. This is also known as the <span
            class="term"
          >law of inertia</span
        >.</li
      > <li
          class="item"
        ><span
            class="term"
          >Inertia</span
        ><strong
            class="emphasis"
            data-effect="bold"
        /> is the tendency of an object to remain at rest or remain in motion. Inertia is related to an object&#x2019;s mass.</li
      > <li
          class="item"
        ><span
            class="term"
          >Mass</span
        > is the quantity of matter in a substance.</li
      > </ul
    ></section
  ><section
      id="fs-id2668844"
      data-class="conceptual-questions"
      data-type="conceptual-questions"
    ><h1
        class="title"
      >Conceptual Questions</h1
    > <div
        class="exercise"
        id="fs-id1263177"
        data-type="conceptual-questions"
      ><div
          class="problem"
          id="fs-id1248749"
        > <p
            class="para"
            id="import-auto-id1518142"
          >How are inertia and mass related?</p
        > </div
      ></div
    > <div
        class="exercise"
        id="fs-id1561865"
        data-type="conceptual-questions"
      ><div
          class="problem"
          id="fs-id2674431"
        > <p
            class="para"
            id="import-auto-id2314210"
          >What is the relationship between weight and mass? Which is an intrinsic, unchanging property of a body?</p
        > </div
      ></div
    > </section
  > </body
>
</html>
